# Base project with local authentication

## What is this and why should i use it?

This project serves as a foundation providing a fully working base for local authentication.
It is built on best practices when it comes to registering a user into a system with his/her credentials as well as providing functionality for processing input when a user attempts to log in through a basic form.

## How secure is the process of authenticating only through username and password?

To provide an as accurate answer as possible we need to start off with a bit of history. For at least 10 years the gap in knowledge between a typical software project manager or the average working citizen and a developer with a couple of years of experience has become an critical problem that needs a solution. Since the explosion of Open Source and the amount of new exiting sites, apps and libraries released at a daily basis has made keeping up with the latest trends in libraries and new frameworks difficult even for experienced developers. All of us involved in lightrays have some kind of knowledge and experience from building software and when most of us started out Stack overflow was not close to invented. We had to rely on thick books often comprising everything possible and specific for the books topic and language. Today from our experience and in our opinion at least the most valuable skill for a brilliant fast working developer is his/her ability to quickly formulate and convert a logical problem into the exact right technical terms and quickly being able to find their way through tweaking the search query and reading over and over again. After collecting and building an understanding of what could eventually lead to a possible solutions, the developer makes a decision based upon probability and intuition on to take giving the decision full focus and moves on from a state of loosely skimming possible solutions to the state of learning. Of course all of this is individual and not everyone uses this technique but this is at least the summary of our general understanding. So lets move on to try to explain what all of this has to do with the current topic. What we are trying to illustrate through the example is that we typically do not use books any more, we rely on our ability to find what we are looking for by the combination of acquiring new knowledge and at the same time efficiently evaluating the skill and quality of the module/library/function that helps us solve the current issue. So this growing gap we are talking about even applies for developers, comparing someone just starting out and a developer that has mastered puzzling together finished and trusted bits of code in to finished products in a fraction of the time it takes the junior developer to achieve the same end result. And if that is not enough the final product is often more efficient, has better security and fewer bugs since the skilled developer today manages to find modules that are likely to be maintained by their skilled authors years to come making the product not only cheaper to produce but also much cheaper to maintain. Time to get to the final point and explain how the gap in knowledge fits in to this model as well. Since the gap in knowledge keeps on growing the typical project-manager often lacks the ability evaluate any of the two solutions, this problem is not isolated to managers communicating with developers, even when discussing pros and cons by building things on your own instead of producing a product by piecing together modules written by people you have never even met can easily end up in what would resemble a political debate or even open up for philosophical views on who to trust and why. Discussing security with another developer, no matter if he/she has a short or long experience is probably one of the most sensitive subjects to ever bring up. We are all like it or not still living in a time where efficiency is key to a companies survival which applies to companies doing business domestic as well as international and this in combination with that the concept and field of security could easily be regarded as the most broad and studied in comparison to any category at all related to software engineering. Adding the assumption and general believe that this is the most difficult concept to fully understand for anyone developer or not makes the whole situation really tricky.

**As a result a general rising mindset becomes more and more popular amongst developers and there are actually a lot of developers out there that has in a way totally given up on the subject, if confronted with providing a rationale for not caring about security at all is the idea and easy way out of thinking that the field is so broad that they have in a sence given up with the following rationale: well if someone really wants to hack me they will eventually succeed anyways, so why should i care at all.**

This is a common misconception and if you think about it its a really arrogant viewpoint and purely disrespectful to the end customer that are going to be using the product. In addition giving it a bit of extra thought its actually really stupid, completely lacking any kind of rational foundation. It might even sometimes be a trick to be able to create an own back-door into the solution until the functionality is properly reviewed and changed. Because if you think about it, it you really have that mindset why even have a register and login procedure at all. Why not provide access to the database for anyone interested in accessing it. A skilled developer could most probably hide the capability to bypass the authentication mechanism forcing the system to authorize access to whatever the developer wants. Since the gap in knowledge discussed earlier. But to be completely honest i think this is really rare. The majority of developers sharing this viewpoint are following the good enough principle and just being a little bit to lazy and possible avoiding the conflict that might arise if the issue is brought up and an request for extending the overall budget to at least cover a proper review and analysis of the final solution as well as visiting the site we mention just bellow this paragraph which gives great advice on how to properly minimize the risk of your server or server instance being hijacked and used for anything possible imaginable, with the risk of making your partially responsible.


There is a well known and great foundation called OWASP which among other things focuses helping to improve software security. Their page is filled with great resources providing best practices when securing your software in a bunch of different ways, discussing what is considered safe and what is not.
We love chatting about security and find the subject extremely interesting so we could typically ramble on forever but here is the bottom line when it comes o security.

A common missconception is that hacking your company or system/product is always done by someone sitting in their home with a laptop and doing something mystic with their console. This is not always the case. A hacker will typically attempt something called social engineering. Considering the old methaphore that a chain is always as strong as its weakest link the same goes for security in general. Sure there are a lot of tools out their both for checking your solution so that you as the developer can be sure you have not missed to close some way into the system in the right way. The same application could typically be used by the one trying to break in as well, an interesting and important factor here that not everyone might have reflected over is how extremely close the relation between securing your solution is and hacking your solution. If the goal is to secure your site and you can make an informed guess on what tools a possible attacker would use, Start by trying to attack your self with the tools you think will be used against your server. If the tools find any vulnerabilities then just fix them, problem solved everyone happy, except for the hacker. Going back to social engineering the attacker might call one of your newest employed consultants and explain that its important and urgent for you to do some action that eventually ends up providing the attacker with access to the system. He/she can call you directly and ask you to visit a specific site that steals anything stored in local storage, they can make up some story of that you need to change password directly pursuade you to provide your old password to authenticate that you are you before you can get your new "password" (just some fake made upp one from the attacker but now he has your password).
Dressing like UPS or DHL and walking right in through the front door might also be fully possible, there are of course endless possibilities, and the only countermeasure you can really do is to keep yourself and your employees well informed about these kind of attacks.

So what does all this have to do with the title above speaking of authentication through passwords? We have now tried to paint the picture of that security once you really think it through is not as easy and rational that we could possible give you a yes or no answer. All we can do is give you some pointers that might be usefull for some of you new to the subject.

* As mentioned security is like the methaphore of the weakest link, when using passwords be creative to get your customers to crate long and varied passwords and maybe even inform them and guide them to use password handeling tools to be able to create hard and complicated password that they might not otherwise have entered. One of us founders use a technique that he was given a long time ago that works like a charm: Use a password handler, there are toons of them, just google, BUT do not keep the whole password there. Visit your local office supplies store and buy one of those little black books. Use the password handeling tool to generate a long and varied password and in your little black book write down what service the password is for and add maybe 7 characters to the name of the site. When logging in you use your password handler to get the first long part of the password and then combine it with the characters you have written in your book. If there is a vulnerability in the password hacking app and an attacker steals your passwords they wont work since they are missing the characters you have written in the book. If you drop the book somewhere its useless for the person finding it in terms of trying to log in somewhere since its only he last characters that are written down. If you can really get your customers to provide long and varying passwords this method is not all to bad.

## So what method would generally be considered among the safest?

Since not supported or built in to this particular project base we wont be talking all two mutch about this method but you can read more about it at Lightrays.io
The method is something called multi-factor authentication.

OWASP the security focused foundation mentioned above are great at without over-complicating things explaining security related matters in ways that pretty much anyone could understand regardless of how many years experience the person have.

The mechanism of multi factor authentication is that you in addition to your password have another factor that verifies your identity.
To clarify what this means is that you could view security and get a better understanding by breaking it down to something that is easier to visualize and conceptualize. Citing a text that is really good from one of OWASPS pages is this:

"Authentication is how a person or system proves their identity. Three methods of authentication are: provide something you know, something you have, or something you are"

All of the three aspects mentioned above provide more proof in the validation of knowing if you are who you claim you are, having all three is of course the strongest way.

Multi-factor authentication has over the last years grown more and more popular. One example that some of you might have seen is how google uses your phonenumber as an authentication mechanism that is sometimes necessary to be able to register a new mail-address. when you register you enter your phone number and receive a code as an sms that you provide in a form just before your account is about to be created. Its becoming more and more supported to provide that you want to use multi-factor authentication for a lot of services. To mention two different ones using this kind of authentication as a service that you can enable if you wish is google and adobe. If you have multi-factor authenticaiton enabled in any of them you need to provide a code from your phone in addition ot your password. By enabling this kind of authentication its not possible for someone else to log in to my accounts if they wont manage to steal both my password and my phone. We will be supporting multi-factor authentication in the future, in the meanwhile choose long passwords instead.

## When should i use what mechanism?

It always comes down to how valuable the data you are protecting is and if there are any ethical or morel concerns with not securing your site to the possible max.
If you are for instance building a completely static page that gets served from the server and does not even have a register and login function or a need for one, then you don't need anything obviously. Maybe not that good of an example..
In our opinion its perfectly fine to rely on password and username only but its important to create functionality that checks that variate and length of the password being provided by the user. Not sure if this is entirely true but there was a rumor a while ago that the most common password used is 1234 which is pretty bad. Having an attacker taking over your machine is of course not as bad as if someone somehow managed to reach our main server. However someone other getting access to your machine being able to publish and spread whatever they want anonymously is not good for anyone.

## General about this project/base

This project/services only goal is to provide an example or a base structure to use as a foundation in building something of your own: It follows generally accepted best practices for registering a user, authenticating a user and does NOT store passwords in clear text, only the randomly generated salt along with the final hash. More info is provided on some of the more interesting functions inside this project
